# Exceptions and Interrupts

Exceptions are unusual conditions that occur at run time, associated with an 
instruction in the current RISC-V hart.

Interrupts are events that occur asynchronously outside any of the RISC-V harts.

The mechanism to process exceptions and interrupts (vectored, nested, separate stack) 
is one of the main improvements in the RISC-V microcontroller profile over the 
privileged profile.

## Exceptions

Exceptions trigger a **synchronous transfer of control** to an exception handler 
within the current hart.

Some exceptions cannot be disabled, and handlers to process them should always be installed.

Some exceptions are **resumable**, i.e. execution can continue to the next 
instruction (for example the illegal instruction handler can implement a custom 
instruction and resume).

Exceptions, in decreasing priority order:

* Instruction address misaligned 
* Instruction access fault
* Illegal instruction
* Breakpoint
* Load address misaligned
* Load access fault
* Store/AMO address misaligned 
* Store/AMO access fault 
* Environment call from U-mode
* Environment call from M-mode
* Instruction page fault
* Load page fault
* Store/AMO page fault

TODO: rework for microcontrollers

TODO: NMI? routed only to hart 0?

### Exceptions vector table

The exceptions vector table is an array of addresses (xlen size elements) pointing to 
interrupt handlers (C/C++ functions).

The address of the exceptions vector table is kept by each hart in (`hcb.excvta`); 
it is automatically initialised at startup with 
the address provided in the hart startup block and can be later writen by software.

## Interrupts

Interrupts are generaly **triggered by peripherals** to notify the application of a 
given condition or event. 

Interrupts trigger the transfer of control to an interrupt handler associated with 
a hart.

A hart can have up to **1024** interrupts, including the system interrupts.

### Interrupt priorities

Interrupts have **programable priorities**, defined as small unsigned numbers, 
usually bytes.
The **priority value 0** is reserved to mean 
_'never interrupt'_ or _'disabled'_, and interrupt priorities increase with 
an increasing integer value.

Interrupts with the same priority are processed in the order of their index 
in the interrupt 
table, with a higher index meaning a higher priority.

For multi-hart devices, the interrupt wiring to harts is implementation specific; 
each interrupt 
may be wired to one or several harts; it is the responsibility 
of each hart to enable the interrupts it desires to process. For redundant systems, 
it is also
possible for multiple harts to process the same interrupt.

### Interrupt priority threshold

Each hart has an associated priority threshold, held in a hart-specific register. 

Only interrupts that have a priority strictly greater than the threshold will 
cause an interrupt to be sent to the hart.

### Priority bits

The actual number of bits used to store the interrupt priority is implementation 
specific, but must 
be at least 3 (i.e. at least 8 priority levels).

> <sup>Extra care must be considered when moving code to implmentations with fewer 
  priority levels, since truncation could lead to priority inversions.
  For example, when moving a program from devices 
  with 4-bit priority bits to devices with 3-bit priorities, if the application 
  uses priority 9 for IRQ0 and priority 3 
  for IRQ1, IRQ0 is expected to have a higher 
  priority. But if the MSB bit is removed, IRQ0 will have priority 1 and be 
  lower than IRQ1.</sup>
  
> <sup>It is 
  recommended that software handling priorities know about the numbr of bits 
  and use asserts to validate the priority values.</sup>

### Interrupt preemption and nesting

If an hart is executing an interrupt handler and a higher priority interrupt 
occurs, the current interrupt handler is temporarily suspended and the higher 
priority interrupt handler is executed to completion, then the initial 
interrupt handler is resumed.

Each new interrupt creates a new context on the main stack, and removes it 
when the handler returns.

There is no limit for interrupt nesting, assuming the main stack is large enough.

### System interrupts

System interrupts are generated by system peripherals, like `sysclock`, `rtclock`.

TBD

### Interrupts vector table

The interrupts table is an **array of pointers** to interrupt handlers, 
implemented as **C/C++ functions**. The number of interrupts per hart is 
implementation specific but cannot exceed 1024 elements.

Each hart has its own table, with handlers for the interrupts it can process.

The address of the array must be programatically written by each hart to 
its `hcb.intvta` register before enabling interrupts, usually during startup.

The first 8 entries are reserved for system interrupts:

* `context_switch` (must have the lowest priority)
* `rtclock_cmp`
* `sysclock_cmp`

## Vector tables relocation

The starting address used by a RISC-V microcontroller is usually 
either a flash memory or a ROM device, and the value cannot be changed at run-time. 
However, some applications, like booloaders or applications running in RAM, 
start with the vector tables at one 
address and later transfer control to the application located at a different 
address. For such cases it is useful to be able to modify or define vector tables 
at run-time. In order to handle this, the RISC-V microcontrollers support a feature 
called Vector Table Relocation.

For this, the `hcb.excvta` and `hcb.intvta` registers can be written at any time from 
code running in machine mode.

## Context stack

When exceptions and interrupts are taken, they push a context on the current stack. 
The stack pointer must be xlen aligned. For RV32 harts with the D extension, 
an additional alignment to 8 must be performed by adding a stack padding.

If the `stackalign` bit in the `ctrl` CSR is set, the stack is always aligned
at 8. Depending on how caches are organised, this usually allows faster context
switches.

The current stack is either `spt` (when in application mode and the `ctrl.sptena` is set),
or `spm` otherwise (when already in handler mode or `ctrl.sptena` is not set).

In other words, regardless how many nested interrups occur, there is only one
context saved on the thread stack, and all other happen on the main stack. Also
all handlers use the main stack, and do not pollute the thread stack, which
do not need to reserve space for the interrupt handlers.

The RISC-V microcontroller profile uses a full-descending context stack, where:

- When pushing context, the hardware decrements the stack pointer to the end of the 
new stack frame before it stores data onto the stack.
- When popping context, the hardware reads the data from the stack frame and then 
increments the stack pointer.

For the current RISC-V Linux ABI, the stack context is, from hight to low 
addresses:

- <-- original sp (`spt` or `spm`)
- (optional padding)
- status (CSR, the current mode when the exception/interrupt occured)
- pc (the next address to return from the exception/interrupt)
- x31/t6
- x30/t5
- x29/t4
- x28/t3
- x17/a7
- x16/a6
- x15/a5
- x14/a4
- x13/a3
- x12/a2
- x11/a1
- x10/a0
- x7/t2
- x6/t1
- x5/t0
- x1/ra <-- new sp, possibly align 8

With the new RISC-V EABI proposal, this would be reduced to a more 
reasonable context stack:

- <-- original sp (`spt` or `spm`)
- optional padding
- status (CSR, the current mode when the exception/interrupt occured)
- pc (the next address to return from the exception/interrupt)
- x15/a5
- x14/a4
- x13/a3
- x12/a2
- x11/a1
- x10/a0
- x1/ra <-- new sp, possibly align 8

With floating point support added, the context stack for the current RISC-V 
Linux ABI is quite large, which is another good reason why the RISC-V 
microcontroller profile should use an Embedded ABI.

- <-- original sp (`spt` or `spm`)
- optional padding
- fcsr (\*) <- for double, it must be aligned to 8
- f31/ft11 (\*)
- f30/ft10 (\*)
- f29/ft9 (\*)
- f28/ft8 (\*)
- f17/fa7 (\*)
- f16/fa6 (\*)
- f15/fa5 (\*)
- f14/fa4 (\*)
- f13/fa3 (\*)
- f12/fa2 (\*)
- f11/fa1 (\*)
- f10/fa0 (\*)
- f7/ft7 (\*)
- f6/ft6 (\*)
- f5/ft5 (\*)
- f4/ft4 (\*)
- f3/ft3 (\*)
- f2/ft2 (\*)
- f1/ft1 (\*)
- f0/ft0 (\*)
- status (CSR, the current mode when the exception/interrupt occured)
- pc (the next address to return from the exception/interrupt)
- x31/t6
- x30/t5
- x29/t4
- x28/t3
- x17/a7
- x16/a6
- x15/a5
- x14/a4
- x13/a3
- x12/a2
- x11/a1
- x10/a0
- x7/t2
- x6/t1
- x5/t0
- x1/ra <-- new sp, possibly align 8

The floating point registers are not saved by devices that do not implement the 
F or D extentions and do not have the `ctrl.fpena` bit set.

To reduce latency, in parallel with saving the registers, the address of the 
exception/interrupt handler is fetched from the vector table.

After saving the context stack:

- the `handler` bit in the `status` is set, to mark the handler-mode
- the `ra` register is adjusted to a special pattern HANDLER_RETURN
- the `pc` register is loaded with the handler address; this is equivalent
with calling the handler.

When the C/C++ function returns, the return code will load `pc` with the 
special HANDLER_RETURN value in `ra`. 
This will trigger the exception return mechanism, which will pop the context 
from the stack and return from the interrupt/exception.

The special HANDLER_RETURN pattern is an 'all-1' for the given xlen with 
some bits used to differentiate contexts.
Since the RISC-V microcontroller profile reserves a slice at the very end 
of the memory space (0xF...), and this slice has the execute permissions
removed, it does not create any confusion.

The HANDLER_RETURN pattern:

| Bits | Value | Description |
|:-----|:------|-------------|
| [0] | 1 | Reserved. | 
| [1] | 0 | Reserved. | 
| [2] | - 0: main stack<br>- 1: thread stack | Stack that holds the context to pop. |
| [3] | - 0: short, without FP<br>- 1: long, with FP | Stack frame type. |
| [4] | - 0: Linux<br>- 1: Embedded | ABI |
| [(xlen-1):5] | 1 | Reserved. | 

The ABI bit is used mainly for compatibility reasons, until the EABI 
will be finalised and implemented by the compiler.

> <sup>The HANDLER_RETURN pattern does not include a bit defining the 
  resulting 
  application/handler mode, since it can be restored from the saved 
  `status` register. Saving this register is necessary not only for the
  `handler` bit (which might have been added to HANDLER_RETURN), but for the
  `cause` field, which otherwise may be overriten by nested interrupts.</sup>
  

  
